<p>Celebrity scientist Legesse Wotrou(PhD) gets the star treatment of a footballer on the streets of Addis Ababa. His appeal lies in his ability to present the most impenetrable theories of astrophysics to his non-scientist listeners who tune to his lectures on the origins of the universe on FM 97.1 on Sundays. EM writers Tamrat Negera and Abiye Tekelemariam had some time with him it his office at the Science Faculty of Addis Ababa University. 
<p>EM: Where were you born and raised?
<p>Dr. Legese: I was born in Arsi, in the South East, in a small place called Sire. There were no high schools in my place. I had to move to Assala, which was then the provincial town, to attend high school. Then Addis beckoned. The Addis Ababa University used to have a program known as lab school. Preparatory students who were in 11th grade, and who passed an exam would be admitted to the university. As fate would have it, I avoided the school leaving examination which was really slippery during our days by making it directly to college from the 11th grade.
<p>EM: That was the days of Marx and the social sciences, but you chose physics. Is there anything in your early formative experience that pointed you on the trajectory that your professional life took?   
<p>Dr. Legesse:  I didn't have any favorite subject in my early days. But my direction was towards natural sciences. So I ended up at Arat Kilo. Then from the various alterative fields at the college, I had to choose one. Somehow for a person with no favorite subject, the choice may be arbitrary. I went for something that challenged me. Physics was that. I never had, before my choice was made, though physics was my destiny, it became. It became my life. 
<p>I ended up teaching physics at a high school called Nifas Silk after my graduation in 1972. This path was more of a forced one. Lab Program graduates had either to teach at high schools after graduation or pay 550 birr which was the estimated amount the university spent on us. I wanted academic life in the university, but I couldn’t manage to pay 550 birr.
<p>EM:  If the sole raison de’tre of your choice was challenge, were there times you thought hard and regretted that you didn’t consider other values?
 
<p>Dr. Legesse: There was some kind of adventure in studying physics. It is more than studying the subject. We heard stories of students joining the department, but not managing to graduate. That was quite appealing. I wanted to test myself against the best and in the most challenging field. 
<p>I liked mathematics though.  In physics you do a lot of math. I had a little inclination towards chemistry but there was too much of memorizing. As to Geography and history, I had to study them a day before exam to remember the facts in them. That would suggest, at least what I am not good at--memory. 
<p>EM:  Was returning to the university’s department of physics a kind of home coming to you?
<p>Dr. Legesse: That was what I wanted all along. Yes, the university was my intellectual home. It also gave me the opportunity to advance my education. The physics department was very small and the scholarships and other financial aid almost exclusively went to the other departments. The university started its own masters program. I did that, and two years latter, won UNDP doctoral scholarships to study abroad. It took me nine years to get the opportunity.  
<p>EM: Britain, the land of Newton and Hawking, was your next stop.  
<p>Dr. Legese:  Yeah. The way you put it makes what happened to me there justified in rather odd way. The University of Sheffield rejected my masters because they weren’t confident enough of the quality of Addis Ababa University’s program. So I had to do my masters again; or rather it was a second masters. Condensed Matter Physics was my area of specialization.   
<p>EM: Then you crossed the Atlantic in rather curious manner. Tell us about that?   
<p>Dr. Legese: - I don’t like calling people racist. It is kind of slippery once you start projection. But my masters advisor was racist, in a very subtle way, and needlessly pushy. I didn’t like him at all. Without saying anything about his behaviors, I asked the school to change my advisor for Ph.D. My point was I needed to a professor. My advisor had worked and researched on the subject for years, but he wasn’t yet a professor.
<p>Since the school administrators liked me, the department looked for a professor for me. They found one in the University of East Anglia at Norwich. He was professor Young, a famous physicist who has many theories of his own. He accepted me as his PhD student and sent me an Id. My school was changed from Sheffield to Norwich. When the Science Faculty at Addis Ababa University learnt that I had switched to Norwich, they instructed me to go back to Sheffield. I refused. The dean of science faculty then was Ato Bisrat.  He sent me a return ticket to Ethiopia.  I had some friends in USA. So I went to U.S.A for a summer vacation, and never looked back. 
<p>EM: Did that experience make you better in understanding student psychology. You advisees like you, we should add. 
<p>Dr. Legesse: I learnt the responsibility of advisors better.
<p>EM: How did you end up with the University of California?
<p>Dr. Legesse: I took an exam in the US. After passing the exam I started looking for a good advisor. I was aware of their importance then. I got one. At AAU, I was trained in the theoretical aspects of physics, and never worked on experiments since there was none in our country. So at the University of California, I wanted to continue on theoretical projects. In US it is the private industry that finances research. The industry gives finances for those who work on the experimental aspect. The theoretical physicists are poor compared to those who work on experimental. They even pay for masters students. So I had a stark choice; of joining theoretical physics and ending up being poor, or working in the experimental area and getting good funding. I thought about that seriously, and decided not to work exclusively on theoretical physics. That, lack of background in the experimental area would make it more challenging, I know. But I never avoid challenge. 
<p>EM: That was how you went for astrophysics
<p>Dr. Legesse:   Yes. They got funding from NASA; and because JPL (Jet Propulsion Laboratory) is in California, there are many astronomers. 
<p>EM: And to unfamiliar area?
<p>Dt. Legesse: After joining them I was exposed to areas I never heard of .It was more sophisticated than anything I ever worked. This was Einstein's physics and in astrophysics whether you work on theory or experiment, you have to know a lot.  I had to work harder mainly for absence of background in computers. In Ethiopia I hadn't even seen one. 
<p>Some of the operations required numerical analysis. You couldn't do that with paper.  You need computers. When I first got into the laboratory at (UCLA), I thought the monitor was the computer. The lab assistant laughed at me. I had to work very hard, double the time the other work. Thanks to God, I rose to the challenge and completed my PhD in Astrophysics. Now I work in astrophysics and astronomy.
<p>EM: That was new area. Granted that it was sophisticated, but was it interesting?
<p>Dr. Legese:  Very much.  The challenge was tough, but it was rewarding. I think it is the most interesting field of physics, even more interesting than quantum physics and high energy physics. In astrophysics, you ask the origin of the universe, stars, and our planet. It goes to the root of who we are. At the same time, you must be well informed about other areas of physics. It is incredible, astrophysics.
 
<p>EM: Was the area of your specialization on white dwarfs? It is such a fascinating concept for us.
<p>Dr. Legese: - My main area of research is the characteristics of neutron stars. Both white dwarfs and neutron stars have unique properties. Neutron stars are very compact. For example, 1CM2 neutron star material is 1016 Kg per cm2.  These stars have eight basic characters. The theory that explains these characters is called standard theory. The theory has some difficulties in explaining the basic characters. I have published six articles on the limitation of  the standards theory in explaining the six out of eight characteristics of neutron stars. I have written two more articles on the remaining limitations of the theory to explain the neutron characters.
<p>EM: To bring analogy from the social sciences, that is taking on the establishment. Have you published any of them in the mainstream astrophysics journals?  
<p>Dr. Legese:  Yes. I have published the six on Journal of Astrophysics and, Journal of Astrophysical and Space Science, and Monthly Notice. These are the prominent journals in the field. I have sent two more articles for publication to these journals. They are under the scrutiny of fellow scientists. If they are published, they will call for the revision of the existing perspective on the characteristics of neutron Stars.
<p>EM: Here we are in the physics department, and students complain of the lack of hard wares to do research and study.  Is that a concern for you, and an obstacle for your work?
<p>Dr. Legesse: - I am now working on theoretical aspects. I develop theories, and the hard wares you need are pencils and paper. If there are other needs I work on computers. There are no advanced telescopes in our country so far. But that isn’t a big problem. The hard ware challenge is not that worrisome. The issue has been a software one, and I use computers for it.
<p>EM: Many Ethiopian scientists who study abroad don’t come back. Astrophysics is “meta” concept here. What impelled you to come home? 
<p>Dr. Legesse:  I was a post doctoral fellow at the UCLA for three years. I didn't leave my country properly, but my assumption when I went to America from England was that my student visa would be changed to J1 visa after finishing my study. I, therefore, continued my education without asking for political asylum. I entered US in 1985, and the INS then had decided not to give political asylum for those who entered US during that time.
<p>EM: Were you ever thinking of seeking political asylum? How do you see its compatibility with scientific integrity?
<p>Dr. Legesse: I don't remember the reason I consulted Ethiopian Immigration lawyers about asking political asylum. They warned me not to ask for it. They said that I would be deported immediately. I worked in the university with the f1 visa. It was renewable every year. But working as a postdoctoral fellow was not safe and the money was not good like tenure. If the research group was not satisfied with your work, you could be fired anytime.
<p>I started applying for university tenure positions. I always came top on the screening test but the minimum requirement was a green card to work with tenure, and I didn't have that. Finally, I applied for political asylum. It was the only means of staying in the US and carrying my research works. The INS sent me a letter to leave the US before September. I went to the regional office of INS to appeal the case. Because an African American was responsible, I stretched my concept of solidarity and thought quite foolishly that he would help me. He was adamant that I return to Ethiopia. His argument was that my country needed educated people.  I told him that I studied astrophysics and there was no place for my expertise back home. His reply was an eye-opening somehow. He said I can start it.
<p>I called Addis Ababa University and asked if they would reconsider me. The dean was very cooperative, and I came home.
EM: You were back home. It wouldn’t surely be like the US for an astrophysicist. What was the feeling?
<p>Dr. Legesse: I resented it even though it was a forced return. The US was a great place for my field. I could do research, study, teach and flourish. You have challenging colleagues in the field. Here I was a loner.  For about four years, I did nothing in terms of research. I had to teach too many courses, four to be exact, which constituted 12 credit hours. There was no time for research. I had to teach, prepare exams and grade students. When I wrote research proposals, and asked for funding, they would tell me astrophysics was a luxury. It was very unproductive time. 
<p>EM: Was that a source of anxiety and dread? How did you take it?
<p>Dr. Legesse: - I engaged myself on other projects completely different from astrophysics.  I did geophysics for the geology department.  I also worked on condensed matter physics. I published two papers on geophysics and condensed matter physics. Geophysics was the most challenging. It was highly mathematical.
<p>EM: That makes you rather unique in the university where teachers don’t think publishing is part of their job description, at least theoretically. 
<p>Dr.Legesse: That is a sweeping remark to make. Publishing on journals is difficult. You have to come up with an original contribution. Original ideas can’t simply crop up in your mind unless you make research. Most of the academics here are busy, working part time in other places. Why? They cannot afford to leave with their salary.
<p>EM: So you contend academics here don’t publish because they are poor economically.
<p>Dr.Legesse:  Yes. If you take my salary as an example, I am not getting half of what I deserve. But I don't have that much of interest in money. I don't have a large family. My wife has a job. We get what we think is enough for us. But if you look at others, they have to support their family. Papers do not just drop from somewhere; people have to think about them. Serious thinking requires time. How can you get time when you are looking after making more money to support your family?
<p>EM: - But what about professors who have tenures? We do not see the dedication to publish.
<p>Dr.Legesse:  Do you know how much a junior Ph.D is paid in AAU? It is 1800 Birr (200USD), and that's before tax. Can you eat good lunch twice with that money? You have to save money to buy a shirt.
<p>EM: Is the problem structural?
<p>Dr. Legesse:  I do not think our government is serious about having serious science in our country. We talk about development. Development will not come without proper technology, and you cannot even think about technology without proper scientific researches. I went to science and technology commission to check few things. There are almost no funds for physics. 
<p>The Ethiopian academics are very discouraged by the government. They pay 18,000 birr for Indian professors. Ethiopians who have the same qualification, probably from  better academic institutions, get 1/6 of that. It is like we are second class citizens. This is very frustrating.
<p>EM: To a brighter point. You incredibly moved to the public sphere some years ago. Astrophysics on the radio? That was kind of weird. Where did the idea come from?
<p>Dr. Legese:  Five years ago, FM 97.1 science journalist called Aschalew came to me with a lot of questions about astronomy and astrophysics. I told him that I needed a minimum of 10 radio programs to answer the questions. He was willing to give me that amount of air time as long I answered the question. I started broadcasting as part of his program of science and technology. 
Listeners then asked me to start a separate program exclusively devoted to astrophysics. It has since been running. Would you believe, I even got the opportunity to broadcast on the national TV. It was sensational. 
<p>Apart from its popularity in the public sphere, it changed the complexion in the university as well.  Then, some of the students here in the university started asking what astronomy was all about, and a few of them were willing to study it for masters program. Two of them graduated from the post graduate class in astronomy.
<p>EM:  Don’t you think it is difficult for a physicist to be a public scholar?
<p>Dr. Legesse: Right. The concepts are complex. The technical language is a barrier. Astrophysics is even more difficult. Explaining astrophysics to the public is explaining the universe. So to explain basic concepts of physics, I try to create allusions, and references. For example, I try to explain the concept of gravity by alluding to peoples’ daily lives, because they always see the consequences of gravity. Even then, astrophysics is too detached from the daily lives of people. Who experiences the movement of the moon every day?
<p>EM: Wouldn’t making the concepts accessible to the public corrupt the science. Those charges were leveled against great scientists like Richard Hawking and Richard Dawkins. The same goes with philosophy. Alan de Botten has his critics for his attempts to make philosophy a non-specialist field. His book The Consolations of Philosophy comes to mind here.
<p>Dr. Legesse:  It depends on what you mean by the corruption of science. I am not presenting astrophysics to make my listeners scientists. I want them to understand the basics. So I simplify the language, and leave out complex theories. If my presentation is the same for fellow scientists, it will be a corruption of science. 
<p>EM: So you use the word Netchach Dinkiyewotch to describe white dwarfs, and Tikur Gudguad for black hole.
<p>Dr. Legesse: Yes, basically. You may know about white dwarfs and black hole. But a lot of my listeners don’t. Using the Amharic equivalent makes sense.
<p>EM: Your program lacks entertaining quality. Some are trying to make science dramatic and entertaining on media. Is there a chance yours will change?
<p>Dr. Legesse: Depends on the topics. If the topics can be made entertaining, why not? I have no dogmas. When I talk about the death of stars for example, I usually make the process dramatic. I tell my listeners how the stars get sick; how treatments under way fail; how they struggle to survive. People would imagine the stars as human beings. It becomes personal.    
 
<p>EM: Going back to academics, your graduate classes are self-contained.  
<p>Dr. Legese: Yes, so far I am the only Ethiopian who studied astrophysics. There are now four Ethiopian students studying astrophysics in South Africa.  They are at the University of Cape Town with NAS project (NAS is South African astronomical study agency). I had been there for six months. Two of them have already started their doctoral. They are going to do experimental works when they return.
<p>EM:  Tell me about the Ethiopian Association of Astronomy. People find it difficult to imagine an association with a focus on astronomy in Ethiopia. 
<p>Dr Legesse:  I am the founder of that association.  I started this foundation because some prominent people encouraged me. More than encouragement, they are helping the association financially. Minister Tefera Walwa and Shiek Mohammed Al Amoudi are among the members of the board of directors. The association is in process of buying a telescope with millions of birr. It will be put on Entoto. The infrastructure is already being built. When the students from South Africa return, they will be working on it.
<p>EM: Is the telescope for public use?
<p>Dr. Legese:  It can be used by the public, and also for research. The weather of Addis is very cloudy, so it is not that good for research. The smog of the city can also contaminate it, but this is just for an experiment, sort of a test.  There are much more effective places to mount telescopes in Ethiopia, like Kombolcha and Tigray, where the weather is more arid. The students will handle the telescope, and they will do experimental works and I will keep doing the theoretical work.
<p>EM:  You are in the thick of things now. Have you revised your feeling about returning to Ethiopia? 
<p>Dr. Legese: I was the thinking that there would be no role for me in Ethiopia. Astrophysics doesn’t bring immediate change in the economy of a country like ours. The equipments used to collect data like gamma ray telescopes were not available here. Being the only astrophysicist in town, I was worried about what I was going to do. Most of the students thought that I was wasting my time. The stars were just a fancy topic.
<p>EM:  Is there a projection of that in your social life as well?  
<p>Dr. Legese: - Very much. There are places where your professional life meets your social life. That is where I appear to others as haughty and detached. But the fact that I have stepped in the public space has changed a lot of things. You will be surprised if I tell you that during my last trip to Arsi to visit my family in Arsi, I was given a celebrity reception. My former high school prepared an event where students asked me many questions. There was a commotion to stand next to me, and their picture taken. Not a lot of physicists get that even in the West. Times have certainly changed.
<p>EM: Science is about facts, truth and pure logic. Human interaction needs more than that. Emotions, sentiments and feelings have big roles. Does that make you struggle to understand human being? 
<p>Dr. Legesse:  To some extent, yes. Not to the extent that Einstein berated his wife for being jealous when he had affairs with other women. He thought that it was irrational for a wife to feel jealous when the husband was happy. I sometimes struggle to understand my neighbors. But it is mutual. They also struggle to understand me. Perhaps the knowledge of mutual non-understanding keeps me humble.
<p>EM: If an existentialist asks you how, what happens to the universe million of years latter, which is the ambit of astrophysics, affects his choices and freedom now, what will your response be?
<p>Dr. Legesse:  I may ask him “What has this got to do with me?”  I am a scientist and I reject that. That is my choice, right. 
<p>EM: But decisions to fund the field or to teach it in universities are matters of public policy, and those are the debates that inform public policy.
<p>Dr. Legesse: It seems the task of institutions is to look ahead; even thousand and thousand years forward. That makes them different from individual human beings. But more than that, astrophysics has present implications as well. Our planet may not survive if things continue like this. We are awash with weapons of mass destruction. Our resources, which are the sources of many conflicts, are rapidly dwindling. Our search for substitute planets in the galaxy which can support human existence is partly impelled by that. Our planet can’t stay forever. 
<p>EM: Let’s talk about Einstein.
Dr. Legesse: What about him?
<p>EM: He was more than a scientist. He had fought for social justice. There aren’t many physicists like that.
<p>Dr. Legesse: He had the platform to do that. His theory about space and time wasn’t accepted at first. But once it was, it changed physics dramatically, and he became celebrity. He got the voice. There are many physicists, including me who care about humanity and justice. The difference is the platform.   
<p>EM:-What are your plans?
<p>Dr.Legesse:- My immediate concern is the publishing of the two articles on neutron stars. Then I want to collect all my works and publish a book.
<p>EM:  What do you think will happen to astrophysics in Ethiopia? You have popularized it. Where can it go from there? 
<p>Dr.Legesse: Ethiopia has enormous potential for astronomical researches. We have a lot of areas which are 2,000meters above sea level, with arid and mid arid weather. We are also close to the equator which means you can view stars in the southern and northern hemisphere. This kind of geography is only found in Chile, and that is a popular country for astronomical research. We have to promote our geography.  I mean we have to mount   few telescopes and collect star data. Then you publish those data and show it to the world, saying for example, "Look at the sky of Lalibela!"  Astronomers from all over the world will flock to our country.
<p>EM: Dr. Legesse, on that note, we want to thank you. 
<p>Dr Legesse: Thank you for having me.

