<p>Addis Ababa’s architecture is a mess.  Dagenet Mekonnen explores the reasons for the flourishing of glass buildings even though light and heat are abundant in Ethiopia.

<p>It is late afternoon in the London Café neighborhood, a stone’s throw away from Addis Ababa’s international airport.  The wide stretch of road leading to Meskel Square, the vast city center which reflects our penchant for heroic scale, is clogged by gridlocked cars.  The apartment complex hosting the café itself is flanked by boxy glass buildings erected for mixed use. These buildings have generated popular buzz, and continue to attract people to this trendy area of the city. 
<p>But some worry that Ethiopian architects are operating in an intellectual vacuum, and view such structures as the embodiment of everything that is wrong with the city’s composition.
 
<p> “Architecture defines our identity.  In the future, it has significant influence in our decision making, quality of life and emotional well-being, “says Gashaw Tekola, a young Western-educated businessman. “By any standard of aesthetic quality, the new glass sheet buildings are drab and uninspired. They are poor imitations of contemporary architecture from elsewhere; a mimicry which has gone wrong.”

<p>Addis Ababa is a city-planner’s nightmare; architectural anarchy reigns supreme.  It is within this chaotic milieu that curtail wall buildings have been recently introduced. The lack of guiding philosophy has led builder Belete Fikru to call Addis’ architecture “whimsical”. Gashaw prefers the contemporary architectural taboo, “rootless”.

<p>The challenge for Ethiopian architects is to adapt the theoretical framework taught in schools here and abroad within the context of Ethiopian reality.  “BorrowedPrêt-à-Porter frameworks lend insight, but they aren’t enough. Ethiopia isn’t a blank tablet where one applies all sort of aesthetic theories without reference to our artistic and cultural values,” argues sociologist Behanu Woldu. 

<p>Several prominent architects think that the glass walled buildings are failing this basic test of aesthetic value.
Fasil Giyorgis has taught architecture at Addis Ababa University for the past two decades.  He considers the city’s new glass buildings “costly cacophony” and complains that they don’t even meet rudimentary operative requirements. “They aren’t to my taste in terms of aesthetic beauty; but my objection is more than that. They aren’t even functional,” he laments.

<p>Lex Plaza, a new office building near Megenagna, demonstrates how the impulse for wanton bombast and flamboyance overrules utilitarianism.  The plaza is fully rented out to businesses ranging from banks to boutiques, but tenants bitterly complain about the temperature of the building.  An employer of Anbessa Bank, which has rented offices on the fourth and the fifth floors, candidly reveals the problem.  “At the cost of losing my job, I always decline all urgent calls from our offices on the fifth floor in the afternoon,” he says.  His fourth-floor office is slightly cooler than those on the fifth floor, which many of the bankers liken to a furnace.

<p>These same complaints are raised by tenants of Adam’s Pavilion, a boat-looking contemporary building in the Sar Bet area.  Some businesses have even vacated the premises due to the unbearable afternoon heat. One businessman in the building compares it to a leather jacket. “I can’t work in the afternoon, for it is too hot;  I can’t work in the evening for it is too cold.  So my office hours are limited by climatic externalities,” he explains.

<p>Architects across the board agree than the glass sheets have a high capacity for temperature rentention.  Fasil raises a simple example to demonstrate this ‘green house effect’.  “Walk in front of the Ethiopian Telecommunication Building on Churchill Road in the afternoon and you will find the place hotter than places seconds away from the building.”  The Anbessa bank worker in the Lex Plaza is metaphorical. “If you come here at 1:00 in the afternoon with bread dough,” he jokes, “you can get your bread within minutes.”

<p>Wossen Aweke, glass enthusiast and designer of many of city’s contemporary buildings, easily shrugs off these criticisms.  He counters that the green house effect can be curbed using environmentally-friendly glass sheets, though admits that the cost may be prohibitively exorbitant.

<p>Some architects pin the green house effect on the ill-conceived orientation of the buildings. “If you build curtail walled buildings in the West direction, it is a recipe for disaster” Michael Shiferaw, a famous architect and art critic says. Adams Pavillion at Sar Bet, Alsam Building in the Mexico Square area and the two nameless buildings in front of the New York Café are classic examples of similarly poor configuration. “To return sanity to city planning, the municipality, architects and the media should speak up against this flagrant disregard for architectural standards,” pleads Fasil.
<p>Glass buildings are certainly spectacular. They juxtapose aesthetic delicacy with freedom. Supporters here laud them as the futuristic alternative that could change the city’s philosophy and style of life. Wossen Aweke is passionate about them.  “Glass sheets buildings proclaim our longing for freedom. They are cloaks of civility and modernity. They are laurels of beauty. They are emblems of simplicity. Even the sky-scraper isn’t oppressive and dominating when it is made of glass,” he says. 

<p>But opponents denounce the theory of a modernity detached from Ethiopian reality.  Others, like Fasil, say that where light is naturally in abundance, freedom exists in other types of buildings. “European architects wonder why we invariably use glass to build exquisite buildings. The tropics, unlike Europe, is full of light and heat!” Fasil exclaims.

<p>Indeed, even without factoring the heat it traps inside, glass seems an unusual choice for the new buildings in Addis Ababa.  Some people cover their windows with newspapers, shutters, or curtains to lessen the effects of the rays.  Others use MDM shutters, which make the curtail walls opaque, thus defeating the purpose of glass sheets entirely.  And all but two glass buildings are without cleaning trolleys. In their absence the buildings quickly get dirty and appear old only months after completion.

<p>Michael Shiferaw suggests architectural variety--a broad mix of building styles, where one building doesn’t necessarily emulate another.  “Neoclassical architecture is like cheese.  Take the Addis Ababa Hilton: it brings forward the medieval concept and form of the Lalibela Hewn Churches.  It may not dazzle you at first.  As you will get used to and fall in love with the sour taste of a cheese, the beauty of neoclassical architecture grips your mind permanently, though not immediately,” muses Michael.   “But contemporary art is like sugar.  It’s pleasure is immediate, but may not be enduring.”  So Michael dreams of a city of cheese and sugar, a city which affords the opportunity for both immediate and permanent pleasure. A city where architectural variety is the true spice of life.
<p>* EM’s Manging Editor, Abiye Tekelemariam, contributed to this article

