<p>As Harar prepares to celebrate its first millennium next month, there is little to be cheerful about the present state of the great city, says Abiye Tekelemariam, EM’s Managing Editor
<p>If a city was to be personified by the outlandish life of a former resident, the fitting personae for Harar would be none other than Arthur Rimbaud, the nineteenth century French poet who remains a mystery to even his most knowledgeable of biographers.  His life as a youth was romantic, the “rational derangement of the senses” as he would call it, and his iconoclasm was evident.  He shocked French Bourgeoisie sensibilities by purposely desecrating the sacred busts of notables, and his “uncultured” hairstyle and bizarre drinking habits. His poetry, however, made him a legendary figure, earning him a vast legion of admirers. But then one day, without so much as a hint, he bid poetry adieu and set off to restlessly roam the world, finally ending up in Harar as a coffee trader.  
<p>In Harar, his ragingly discontented soul grew relative tranquility, and the bohemian poet became almost Victorian, arrogantly looking down upon the locals with disdain. To the utter disgust of his friend and admirer Ras Mekonen, the ruler of Harar, he became involved in the slave trade before cancer forced his evacuation to France, where he slowly and painfully wasted away.
  
<p>As Harar prepares to celebrate its first millennium in July, the parallels with Rimbaud’s life are striking.  Its middle ages were golden. At the beginning of 16th century, Ahmed Ibn Ibrahim al-Gahzi(Gragn) launched a war from Harar deep into the highlands on the North, occupying much of Christian Ethiopia for more than a decade. For two centuries after the defeat of Gragn by king Gelawdewos who was helped by the Portuguese, Harar’s strength in culture, poetry and trade were unrivaled throughout the Horn of Africa.  Its civilization then gradually eroded in the 18th and 19th century, culminating in the loss of independence during the brief conquest by the Egyptians in mid 1870s and the prolonged subjugation of Emperor Menelik.
<p>The Harar I visited two months ago mirrors more of the decadent slave-trading days of Rimbaud than his romantic adolescent life. The walled “old Harar” is no longer the grim, crumbling pile of rocks that Sir Richard Burton recounted in his travel book, First Footsteps in East Africa, but it is degenerating. My Harar-residing friend who acted as a hospitable guide for an afternoon walked me past the same famous gate through which Sir Burton allegedly entered Harar. It was obliterated in such a way that the English explorer’s account of his ordeals standing before an impressive gate “large enough for either a man or a beast” while requesting to meet the ruler of the city, might appear to be a fantastic apparition constructed to impress his readers.  The fact that this great citadel of Harrar has been destroyed to make way for the new road tells the curious state of modern Harar. It is neglected and badly administered.
<p>We went through the main of the city’s seven gates to visit the walled city, otherwise called Jugol. There the unimpressive Medhane Alem church built by Ras Mekonen welcomed us to the old town.  Medhane Alem composes the skyline of the city and, like most other local heritage sites, it is the center of controversy.  Harar’s claim of “fourth holiest city in the world” lacks the validatation of Islamic texts or historical documents, but it nonetheless remains ingrained in the myth of the indigenous Harrari people, descendants of Axumite soldiers posted to the region to protect the empire’s trade and slave routes. Some Hararis believe that a city with such status should therefore not have the Christian symbol of the cross as a skyline.  A huge statute of the last ruler of Harar is scheduled to soon be erected in front of the church, which Christian residents allege is intended solely to block the view of the church.
 
<p>During the rule of the Egyptian Rauf Pasha, Harar was first introduced to the culture of coffee and tea houses. Around the church, conspicuous traces of that past remain. However, some of this coffeehouses are in desperate need of restoration.  
<p>From here, we meandered along the legendary narrow cobblestoned alleys which lead to the main market.  On the way to the market, we stepped inside two Harrai houses.  The Harrais are proud to show off their two-storied living spaces and reveal the connotations of each symbol within. One can even discover whether a virgin woman ready for marriage resides in the home from the simple arrangements in the house. 
<p>Our trip to the market was considerably less eventful. The market itself, I was told, has become less vibrant than tourist guide books assert, but our timing was also not ideal. “Saturday afternoon, no market,” cried a drunken tour guide whose offers to “help” us were rebuffed quite rudely by my friend.
<p>One of Harar’s main attractions was Rimbaud’s house, which has now been turned into a museum. Some historians, however, say that Rimbaud didn’t have specific residence in Harar and instead wandered from one cheap albergo(local term for pension) to another.  It is easy to see why the official version of the story is unappealing. The grand two-storey villa is constructed with expensive wood and its wide courtyard doesn’t seem to reflect Arthur Rimbaud’s unappeasably edgy lifestyle.  The story grows even less credible when one learns that the period where he allegedly lived in that house was his most discontented and bored of his Harar days.
<p>The more reliable claim is that what is now referred to as “Rimbaud’s House” was actually a French school where emperor Hailesellasie(then Teferi Mekonnen) completed some of his schooling in French history, literature, philosophy and art.  For the non-readers of Ethiopian history, the declaration frequently made by Harar’s tour guides regarding Rimbaud’s role in Hailesellasie’s tutelage is utterly false. The French poet’s sad departure from Harar, in fact, occured a year before Haileselassie’s birth.
<p>Perhaps, a visit to Abdela Sherif’s house lends insight into why some of Harar’s history is controversial. Crammed in one tiny room is almost all of Harar’s history--old books which show the famed 16th century Hararian bookbinding techniques, spears which belonged to Gragn, Emperor Menelik’s gun, jewelry as old as Summa Theologica, and more. The city lacks decent museums for storing and preserving the precious artifacts and research on the historical materials are scant.  Instead, one simply has to depend on the unverifiable words of a single man to in order to believe their history.  More than that, it appears that the artifacts themselves continue to exist, in part, because of his strong will.
 
<p>Our visit of Jugol ended with a brief stop-over at one of the hyena man’s shows.  Mulugeta, as the man is known, removes pieces of meat from a plastic bucket, puts it on a small stick, holds the stick between his teeth and then feeds the hyenas with his mouth, while excitable tourists watch and take photos. To my disbelief, I heard one Ethiopian spectator criticizing Mulugeta for not doing it mouth-to-mouth. “The previous one did it with out the stick,” he complained. 
   
<p>Beyond the city walls, most of modern Harar appears to be a colorless small town.  Its old cars and taxis lend the appearance of a city under UN sanctions and its café’s are smaller, duller versions of those in Addis Ababa. With the exception of the main street, asphalted roads are essentially non-existent; Internet connection is inexplicably slow.
 
<p>The disturbing effects of qat addiction--a leafy, locally grown addictive narcotic-- are also noticeable, and plenty of people with manifest insanity roam the streets. Work ethic is at its lowest.  In government offices, people scarcely work in the afternoons, opting to chew qat instead. Beer overflows in the city and people start drinking early in the morning, continuing throughout the day and breaking only during qat-chewing hours. The single place worthy of visiting in the new city is the buzzing Christian market besides the Shoa Gate of the old city.  There, one can find Harar’s world-renowned coffee rather cheaply.
<p>As biographers of Rimbaud have struggled to understand and explain him, Harar also remains a mystery in many ways.  Most of the old city awaits the inquiring mind to seek out more of its history and treasures. The fact that it has been left to fall apart is thus a sad commentary of the city’s and Ethiopia’s fall from the glorious past.
<p>If Sir Burton’s expression of his feeling when he finally left Harar is read a contrario, it will fully capture what I felt when I took the night taxi back to Addis Ababa. “How melancholy a thing is success,” wrote Sir Burton. “Whilst failure inspirits aman, attainment reads the sad, prosy lesson that all our glories‘are shadows, not substantial things.’” 
