<p>Deep in the heart of Addis Ababa, a depressingly run-down area is getting a new lease on life.   A modern complex houses a range of flourishing businesses, behind which an aesthetically unappealing building is being erected.  Not far away, another hosts a school.  “This area is getting a tremendous facelift. The shacks are half gone.  The buildings have given the place a pleasant feel and look,” says Daniel Taye, who has a shop nearby.  Welcome to St. Raguel Church in Merkato and its newfound industrial vocation.
<p>St. Raguel is just one of the burgeoning corporate interests of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church.   Lideta’s St. Mary Church has every amenity one could imagine—a hospital, Internet cafe, school and restaurant;  St. Tekelahymanot has a massive brick factory.  St. Urael’s unfinished building is already fully rented out, and plans to introduce new businesses at St. John,  St. Peter and Paul are already completed.   So successful are its industrial pursuits that the church is demolishing its sacred cemeteries all over Addis to make way for new buildings.
<p>Alongside the thriving ventures, however, are the growing tensions among followers of the Church.  “Religious hucksterism is on the way to our historical church, and if you read Sinclair Lewis’ Elmer Gantry, you will know what I mean,” laments a senior lecturer at Addis Ababa University, who wishes to remain anonymous. He thinks the God of Orthodox Christianity is less of a flagrant materialist and more of a social justice guru.   He also thinks Jesus’ teaching about wealth and profits are literal and easy to understand.  “Freedom comes when you are impervious to desire and loss. Our Lord has made it clear that the way to Heaven is fraught with danger if your daily occupation is being obsessed with balance sheets, and what works for individuals should work for the church.   It has to lead by example.”
<p>Particularly controversial is the destruction of the cemeteries located behind most church compounds.  The dramatic transformation at St. Peter’s in Gulele area, left priests and servicemen unnerved.  Similarly, many followers said they felt a disconnect with the church the day the cemetery at St. Urael’s was bulldozed in broad daylight.  “My son came to visit his mother’s cemetery all the way from America, and instead found a big building where her body was,” says Dr. Tamrat,  with a trace of sorrow in his voice.
<p>Defenders of the church’s recent ventures argue that modernity calls for change.   Samuel Admasu is a new-generation business man.  He has a gift and religious artifact shop in St. Raguel’s complex.   In his spare time, he coordinates the church’s special spiritual program for Merkato’s businessmen and women.  Samuel questions the traditional assumptions of those who oppose the marriage of church and business.   “How long should the Church continue depending on individual charity for its existence?” asks Samuel.    He thinks it is time for the Church to help itself.
<p>Others see the Church’s eager embrace of capitalism as the result of simple economics.  “It is responding to demand. People’s attitudes are shifting from charity to service.  As capitalism grows in the country, the church has to adapt to these new realities.  It is a decision of fortitude and foresight on the part of the church’s leadership.  I can’t say the same about the church’s others aspects of leadership,” says economist Zewdu Bekele.
<p>The growth of business is even more startling, considering the church’s theological rigidity which limits freedom to adapt to contemporary culture.  There is an overriding authority which dictates acceptable behavior, and it is loaded with heavy religious bureaucracy.  “Businesses need low barriers and flexibility to thrive. The church’s ventures are growing depspite that.   It defies logic,” claims former college professor Asamenew Habte.   When I put that to one internal opponent of the new trend, he retorted that the church’s leadership has turned into a “one-man show”.   He refused to identify the man.
<p>Some church observers think the issues raised by those who oppose religious corporatism are uninformed by the historical development of the Orthodox Church, its dogma and canonical law.  D/N Daniel Seifemichael teaches theology at the Trinity College.  Despite the apparent worldliness of the church involving in business, he thinks the marriage has deep historical roots.   “Hermits and monks in monasteries have been producing and selling farm products for years and years. Previously, the church had farms. Patriarch Abuna Theoflos had made the church own buildings so that it would be financially independent,” he states.
<p>The merger between church and business has spurred similar debates in other countries as well.   And, as in those regions, the credibility of the Orthodox Church depends on the balance it strikes between corporatism and the agony and ecstasy of faith.  D/N Surafel, theologian, thinks that so far the balance is skewed in favor of capitalism.  His judgment is replete with evidence.  At St. Urael’s, the view of half of the main church is blocked by the newly erected building.   Some followers see that as an affront to the culture of overt display of religious symbolism formerly cherished by the Church.
<p>Surafel’s objection runs deeper than symbolism. He calls into doubt the church’s understanding of the relationship between its ultimate vocation, which points beyond this world, and its penultimate role, which has worldly aspects.  Surafel thinks the latter shouldn’t trample upon the former.  “I have seen monasteries in Egypt which own farms. But the produce is dedicated to spiritual purposes.  People who go to visit monasteries in Egypt won’t worry about food.  They get it for free.  The priests and their families get free medical access.  Even Muslims go to the Orthodox churches in Egypt to get cheaper medical treatment. The purpose of the church’s businesses here should be to help it fulfill its ultimate role,” he says.   And whether capitalism will help the church fulfill its social and spiritual roles here, is for time alone to judge.
