<p>If we heed Hegel, we may avoid disaster in Omo valley and Dire Dawa, says an Ethiopian scientist. Abiye Tekelemariam listens to him talk.  
  
<p>Shiferaw Arsano has all the traits of a doomsday prophet, whose sentiments occasionally border on pure mawkishness.  For him, the spectre of a vanishing Ethiopia within our lifetime is not unimaginable, and thus the need for action immediate. “The period of talk is over,” he heatedly repeats, “This is time for action.”
<p>Shiferaw is currently doing his doctoral on the effects of climate change in Ethiopia.  His base is the southwestern Omo valley where unusually heavy rains last year caused flash flooding in the area, killing at least six hundred people and leaving tens of thousands displaced.  The immediate assumption was that the disaster was caused by deforestation and overgrazing. Yet the fiery-tempered Shiferaw insists its cause is much further from home--in the lands of the industrialized world. “It is such sloppy conclusions that have continually led us to disaster after disaster,” he counters. “Most of the evidence tends to show that the cause is global warming. Believe me, the future is here.” 
<p>According to the report by the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), climate change caused by global warming may be crueler to Africa than any other part of the world.  At present, many areas of the continent are barely habitable.  Shiferw bitterly predicts that the Omo valley may lose up to two-thirds of its population within thirty years, as dwellers increasingly migrate to the highlands to escape the staggering impacts of climate change. 
<p>Dire Dawa, the former hub of national commerce and trade, has become a city on death row.  In 2006, it was hit twice by devastating floods, forcing many residents to contemplate moving elsewhere.  “Floods aren’t new to Dire Dawa. They were recurrent when we were kids,” says 57 year-old government employee Negatu Bayeh. “But in terms of intensity and frequency, the ones we are experiencing now are unmatched in recent years”
<p>In the past ten years alone, average temperature in the country has risen by nearly  1%, and a further increase of 3% is expected by 2030.  Increased dryness is forecasted for arid and semi-arid regions of the country.   High temperature, unpredictable rainfall and shortage of water means grazing and arable lands will dwindle, driving out pastoralists and farmers.  Drought will become more frequent and prolonged.  Lowlands may be flooded by the overflowing rivers, fed by the heavy rains in the highlands. “Most of Ethiopian rivers’ water-holding capacity has seriously diminished because of the increasing silt in their beds,” explains Shiferaw. “With our reservoirs badly planned and built, the Omo valley disaster will be a common occurrence.”
<p>The highlands will also not be spared the grave, if indirect, effects of climate change.  Millions of people from the lowlands will inevitably migrate, leading to overpopulation.   Add the consequences of soil erosion, and a nightmarish scenario unfolds. Food supply will drastically diminish, further burdening existing infrastructure.  As the size of land allotted per person decreases, crop yields will accordingly decline. 
<p>Some political scientists predict that climate change may trigger conflicts in Ethiopia and exacerbate the now dangerously explosive resource-based tensions among ethnic groups.
<p>For the skeptics, Shiferaw hastily references two recent studies on the preparedness of countries to adapt to climate change.  According to the research released by Colombia University’s Earth Institute, Ethiopia ranks 96th among 100 countries in its ability to cope up with the challenges of climate change. Another study by the University of Pretoria suggests the whole of Africa may have already lost around 29 billion USD, due to the effects of global warming alone. 
<p>The problem with Ethiopia, is that most of the policy makers, intellectuals and members of the press don’t even realize that we are in hot water. At the Environmental Protection Authority, one is hardpressed to find a single research paper on global warming.  National academic institutions are similarly oblivious. The media has largely ignored it as a “primarily European matter”, despite the fact that Ethiopia remains one of the countries hardest hit by the rippling effects of climate change.
<p> “One of the reasons may be learned helplessness,” says environmental engineer Belay Tsegai. “The carbon emitters are somewhere else. So people shrug their shoulders and say, ‘what is it that I can achieve by constantly thinking about the climate-alarm other than outrage?’” 
<p>While the issues of justice and the fairness of ‘footing the bill’ for the mistakes of another continue to be debated, Shiferaw and other researchers alike are convinced there is much we can do to adapt in the meantime. 
<p>Strengthening organic agriculture and maintaining biodiversity is one such remedy. “Any human activity that sequesters carbon dioxide is helpful in staving off the threat of climate change. We should, therefore, detach our agricultural research capacity away from industrial agriculture and focus on the sidelined organic agriculture,” proposes Tewolde Brehan Gebre Egziabher, head of the Environmental Protection Agency. 
<p>Harnessing Ethiopia’s abundant renewable energy sources-- hydro, solar, wind and geothermal power--is another good place to start.  Reversing deforestation is more difficult, but also well within the realm of possibility.  Private ownership of land, and thus ownership of all trees and vegetation on the land, is strongly advocated, but is flatly rejected by the Ethiopian government.
Discussing the obligation closer to home, Shiferaw shifts from raw sentimentality to carefully considered philosophy. “I think it was Hegel who said ‘the owl of Minerva doesn’t take wing until dusk, the owls don’t fly until it starts to get dark’. It takes years until the conscience of industrialized countries is assaulted by the harm they have done to poor countries. Our task is to cajole them, or maybe to haunt them with disturbing moral questions. Until the dusk, however, we shouldn’t sleep away the high noon. There may be no dusk after all if we do that.”
