<p>Kamilat's acid attack story was shocking. Wait until you here other voices, says Tesfalem Woldeyes 
<p>As an expert at the Legal Aid Service of the Ethiopian Women Lawyers Association (EWLA), Shewaye Takele has observed a lot of horrific violence against women-- malicious battery, life-threatening assault, abduction, rape—which desanctify manhood. But what she encountered four months ago was too much to take.
<p>She was as usual busy advising clients when a young couple, tongue-tied and shabbily dressed, stood by the door of her office. The woman had her child tucked to her chest. Her woebegone looks emitted hints of torment. Shewaye felt queasy on her stomach, and knew that something terrible had happened to the couple. When they told the story that led them to her office all the way from Yirgalem, she couldn’t contain herself. Tears gushed out of her eyes like hot spring, and overhearing clients and workers turned the organization’s office into one massive mourning site.  
<p> “How am I to understand and explain it,” asks Shewaye, still openly struggling to imagine how a human being could commit such festering crime on a child who is barely able to walk.     . 
<p>The story was heart-rending. 
 
<p>On a fateful morning, the mother went to the river to fetch water living her 12 months old child with a 65 years old man. When she was back, she found her daughter in a pool of blood, almost dead. They brought their child to Addis Ababa to get medical treatment, first from Yekatit 12 hospital, and then the specialized Addis Ababa Fistula Hospital.   
<p>"They are back to Yirgalem now, but I am still haunted by that story," Shewaye said. "The baby was physically devastated.”
<p>Little did she know that she would have listened a replica story two months latter. This time, the baby was three months younger. Shewaye was also introduced to what doctors call traumatic fistula.    
<p>Traumatic fistula is an abnormal opening between the reproductive tract of a woman or girl and one or more body cavities or surfaces, caused by sexual violence.  Out of the 91 such cases reported from 1991 to 1997 in the Addis Ababa Fistula Hospital, 13 of them occurred due to rape. Twelve of the raped girls were under 15.    
<p>According to studies, rape and sexual abuse constitute the highest portion of gender-based violence. A joint study conducted by the Addis Ababa University and EWLA found that from 1996 to 2002, 280 of the 560 cases of gender-based violence which were being investigated by Addis Ababa Police, were related to rape and sexual abuse. 
<p>A recent survey shows that, among sexually active adolescent women in six urban areas in Ethiopia, 9pc had suffered rape. There are more shocking revelations. In one study15pc of the respondents among girls aged 10 to 24 in Addis Ababa, said that their first sexual experience was prompted by rape.  43pc claimed they had been coerced into sex at least once. 
<p>Although the statistics, studies and recent cases show how gender-based violence is prevalent in Ethiopia, the attention given to the issue seemed to be event-based. Kamilat Mahedi’s ordeal best explains the management of information regarding gender-based violence.  After Kamilat's acid attack news broke in both the state and private media, it caused stir in the public. Clips of newspapers were photocopied and sold one birr each on the streets. Seminars and press conferences on the issue came thick and fast
<p>But then with Kamilat’s travel to Paris to get treatment, the cameras and mikes were switched off and the pen stuttered. A demonstration organized by EWLA to oppose gender-based violence was attended by a few hundreds only--most of them members of various women rights groups. Yet in that gathering, equally distressing stories were told. Senait Ketema’s was one of them.      
It was the first time that Senait, 21, was seen publicly after she was attacked by a stalker with acid two and half years ago. Her face was half-covered with a nylon scarf.  She told EthioMirror that her refusal to accept a request for a love relationship was what led the man to attack her. 
<p>"I was a high school student at that time. I had known the person for two years. He was a taxi driver, who sometimes gave me unsolicited ride," she said. 
<p>When he asked her out, she turned him down repeatedly. She tried to politely decline requests of romantic relationship. That, she said, turned him aggressive.
<p>"One day he called me to ask for my final decision. After I made my point, he seemed convinced," she said. "I never thought what happened would happen."     
<p>A few days after the telephone conversation, he waited her in the way to her house. He was polite, and seemed to accept her decision. She allowed him to walk her to her residence, saying a courteous goodbye to him. When she was knocking the gate, he called her name.  She thought he had something to tell her and went to him. Then it all happened. He spilt acid on her face and run. She rushed to her neighbouring compound, and got first aid treatment.
<p>The scars on the left eye, left-side of her nose, her right shoulder and breast testify to the tribulation she had to face at such a tender age. Yet for her, the wound would have hurt less had the man not been roaming freely the city, and the street the attack took place for a year. Police put him in custody for three months, and then he was released on bail. She had to change her residence to avoid further attack. Now with him sentenced to four and half years in prison, she spoke with a sense of relief; a relief which at times change into fear when she thinks whether he would be back.  
<p>"The guy will be released on parole in two years, and I don’t know that he won’t be back with vengeance," she said. 
<p>Senait blamed the existing law for not punishing the criminals in proportion to their act. Although, unlike the 1957 penal code, the 2005 revised code incorporated various provisions for the protection of women, rights activists here say the law is too lenient on sexual harrasement offenders and other gender-based violences. .  
<p>The legal problem with sexual harassment is acuter that the others. A recent study conducted by EWLA shows that 80pc of women in Ethiopia has been victims of sexual harassment at work places as schools. But the law gives scant reference to this crime.   
<p>"Since no clear definition is provided for sexual harassment in the Criminal Law of the country, incidents of unwanted physical contact, repeated sexual advances even after a victim has expressed that she is not interested, and threats, may not be punishable," Mahder Paulos, Chairwoman of EWLA  explained. "Rather we expect to see tangible bodily injury to consider incidents as cases of violence." 
<p>The Chairwoman calls for a clear provision in the law on sexual harassment. 
  
<p>EWLA continues to help those who are courageous to come forward, but there are so many still living silently with their heartbreaking stories. Mahdre has a message for those unheard voices. 
<p>"Our silence encourages perpetrators of violence to continue what they are doing. So lets not be silent! Let’s speak out." 

