<p>We are chewing ourselves to collective lunacy, says Abiye Tekelemariam
<p>For a casual observer, there is nothing which makes Munaye--whose name is changed upon request-- stand out from the group of impudent hayseeds who are chewing qat at the hovel near Legehar.  . He laughs uproariously, interrupted by switching spells of inspired conversation, and heightened calmness. In his right hand, he holds tiny tooth-cleaning stick and polishes his teeth furiously. Sometimes, he spits out a gob of saliva without caring about where it lands. 
<p>But Munaye’s story is extraordinary. When he was in his early teens, his parents left Ethiopia, and took him with them to the US. He performed well at school, and joined one of the country’s prestigious colleges. Five years ago, he came to Ethiopia for summer vacation. According to his mother, his friends introduced him to Qat, and he was hooked to the green leafy substance immediately. He didn’t want to go back to the US. To the disappointment of his family, he dropped out of college. Doctors at Amnauel hospital who diagnosed him say he has developed psychosis.
<p>Munaye’s case is rare. There is a consensus among researchers that Qat is only mildly addictive. Doctors say he might have latent mental illness which was worsened by qat use. However, there is now a concern among a number of psychiatrists and other scientists that qat may not be as harmless as legend has it. 
 
<p>In May 2005, Asfaw Debella, Dawit Abebe and Almaz Abebe published their damning finding about the impact of qat on health and socio-economic well-being, including its contribution to the spread of HIV. “A strong association was observed between qat chewing habit, indulgence in alcohol and recourse to risky sexual practices and hence to the spread of HIV infection,” states the study.  In Amanuel hospital, some doctors claim that half of the patients they diagnose are affected by either qat induced or qat exacerbated mental problems.
 
<p>Although qat’s chemical ingredients are yet to be fully identified, its main psychoactive elements are Cathinone and Cathine.  Atalay Alemu, a professor of psychiatry at Addis Ababa University, has been studying the mental effects of qat for years. “There is no single incontrovertible finding about the psychological harm of qat, but there are a lot of researches which direct towards that, at least in cases of minor mental problems,” he says.
<p>Cathinone is similar in chemical composition to amphetamine, and massive intake of the latter causes schizophrenia and psychosis. Several studies have shown that the same problems are caused by excessive use of qat. “To get doses of cathinone enough to have serious impact on the brain, one has to chew incredible amount of leaf. There are people who do that,” argues Atalay. “A recent study in Hargessa, Northern Somalia, concludes that the likelihood of those who start qat chewing in their early age, or who take massive quantities of qat at any given time, to be afflicted with schizophrenia is way greater than that of others.”
<p>New researches are also identifying previously unknown ingredients in qat. Two years ago, Dr. Muna Ismail of the King’s college discovered classes of chemicals called cathedulins which make the brain emit dopamine-- neurotransmitter chemical-- as in cathinone.  Ismail’s research, which adds new dimension to the study of qat’s effects on the brain, is received with buzz by doctors and chemists. 
<p>In Amanuel hospital, doctors spot several minor mental illnesses which are associated with regular qat chewers. Anxiety Depression is one of them. Agitation and aggressiveness is registered among some qat chewers. Mania is not uncommon, and after the feel-good effects of qat are lost, suicidal and other self-destructive thoughts are observed among a number of chewers.
<p>Whether qat can by itself cause psychosis on those who have no history of it, or it is just an abettor, needs further research. Yet in many cases in Amanuel, psychiatrists have found sketchy evidence that some patients have developed psychosis independently of their mental history. “Some assume qat is just an accomplice, not the principal offender. But making that assumption without more study is dangerous. The same noises were made about cannabis before, but new researches are finding otherwise,” says Atalay.
<p>Qat’s non-mental adverse health effects are, however, less controversial. Chewers’ increase of tolerance to its chemicals has cardiovascular effects like hypertension and myocardial infraction. There is a high prevalence of mouth cancer and gingivitis among chronic chat chewers. Ulcer is pervasive.  The component called tynamin which is found in the narcotic substance is responsible for gum disease and loses of teeth.  
<p> “Tobacco and alcohol also have a lot of health complications. If people take them willfully, it is their choice,” says Tamru Regassa, a medical doctor. But if qat is proved to be responsible for serious mental diseases, the libertarian argument will be shakier. The World Health Organization has equated the habit of qat chewing with amphetamine abuse, declaring cathinone as one of controlled drugs, and most Ethiopian psychiatrists support a tough line on qat use. They fear that when researches find conclusive evidences on the effects of qat, as they suspect that they would, it may be too late. 
<p>The trend is certainly alarming. Qat chewing is widespread. A prodigious number that up to 27% of the population chews qat regularly is reported by some studies. In all major cities except Mekelle, qat chewing houses are rivaling bars and liquor stores numerically. It is also equalitarian in that no social or economic class is unpenterated by it. As qat is drought resistant, it is becoming a favorite plant among farmers.  
<p>But without that elusive conclusive evidence, and with advocates of qat deafening in the background, it is difficult for policy makers to come up with concrete policy. Some scientists, however, believe that lack of smoking gun shouldn’t compromise our ability to recognize potential dangers and take corrective and prohibitive measures. 
 <p>Banning the leaf which has become a way of life may be a step too far says Sociologist Seyoum Gebre Selassie(Ph.D), who teaches at Addis Ababa University,  “It isn’t practical because there won’t be enough jail space to put offenders, ” he argues.  Instead, his palliative is more educative and rehabilitative approach, involving civil society institutions and religious organizations, coupled with “firm application of licensing rules and regulations”. 
<p>For Atalay, if the qat debate creeps into the public sphere, there will be enough room to dispel the myth and reveal the truth about the substance. As he and others struggle to do that, qat’s use is spreading like wild fire, and becoming the integral part of our daily lives.
