<p>(Taken from the various works of Richard Pankrust)
<p>One of the most notable of the numerous African slaves torn away from their homeland was the beautiful young Ethiopian called Ajiame, latter known 'the beloved 'or Mahabuba. She was taken to Europe by a German aristocrat prince Herman Von Puckler. She was one of the 25 thousand Ethiopian slaves who were exported a century and half ago.
<p>Ajiame was raised in the noble family living in the southwest province of Ethiopia, Gume. When she was 10, the unfortunate war with neighboring people destroyed the legacy of her parents.  Before she became the victim of slavery with her sisters, their town had been devastated, and her father and her six brothers killed in the war. It took 6 months journey of hardship and privation to reach at Gonder, the Ethiopian capital of the era. From there they went to Khartoum where her sister had been sold. She was then offered at the greatest slave market at Cairo.
<p>Prince Herman Puckler left his estate at Muskau, Silesia and arrived in Cairo in 1837. Among the historic places he visited in Egypt, the Cairo slave market had a stopping power .Astounded; he observed how slaves were sold to their respective buyers. The prince was surprised by the quietness of the slaves; they appeared like a sheep whose wool was being examined. 
<p>Ajiame made deep impression on the prince. His biographer Ludimilla Assigns says, he was "...moved by her charm and the pleasantness of her appearance." He decided to buy her. The prince who was fascinated by his purchase took Ajiame for the journey on the Nile. Their attachment increased day after day. In one occasion, she threw one of Puckler’s gifts overboard and refuses to eat for 24 hours, but subsequently begged forgiveness in the sweetest of voices. The prince increasingly adored the Ethiopian girl. However, he was reluctant to reveal her to his wife, princess Lucie, at Muskaue. 
<p>In September 1837, for the first time after he bought Mahabuba, he wrote to his wife, saying that he bought slaves.  However, he did not mention the name of Ajiame or Mahabuba. In 1838, he took her to Palestine; there he visited the Christian shrines. From Palestine, he wrote to his wife Lucie disclosing the name of the two slave girls, the elder of whom he now spoke of as Mahabuba, the Arabic word "the beloved". She was, he wrote,"my real valet, and like a loyal dog scarcely leaves me night or day"
<p>Lebanon was the next destination for the prince and his slaves. Puckler declared his intention to visit Lady Hester Stanhope, an honorable British resident there. She was the niece of Britain’s Prime Minister William Pitt. Initially the Lady was reluctant of the visit of the prince with Mahabuba. A confidant of her Dr. C.C. Meryon recorded, "a slave is slave and whether her master makes a companion or a scullion, it is not different to me." However, the good Lady soon relented, and Mahabuba was received. Doctor Meyron suggested that her age was seventeen. 
<p>After that, they left Lebanon to Europe. The prince was teaching his slave girl Italian and could talk to her about 'everything'. She became his good pupil. He recorded that "she was the person who is most avid for learning and the quickest to comprehend that I ever met, she learned language like child's play."
<p>Religion
<p>Mahabuba did not remember her early day's religion. Once he asked, "Are you Christian or Mohammedan?" She did not have any religious memory of her native land.  Her memories were  packed with, "I remember only the flame around us ,when the town was burning; how my dad and brothers were killed, and my sisters are dragged away ." Turning to him she would ask, "Is it not all the same to you if I am Christian or a Muslim?" Puckler then asked her if she had a concept of one almighty God, and if so, where she thought he was. She replied "here, here, here...there"
When he approached to Europe, he disposed all his other slaves. But he took Mahabuba to visit the Greek Church at Burnabat near Snyrna. He recorded that she was delighted as a child "with the magnificent gilding and countless lights, and was struck that the portrait of Madonna was blacker than herself.”  She duly asked, "Whether the virgin Mary had been a negress"
<p>In Europe 
<p>They were approaching continental Europe. The prince was worried about the imminent meeting between his slave girl and wife. Puckler arrived in Austria, Vienna in 1840.He noted in his diaries "the Ethiopian damsel was developing more and more nicely..." and he wished he would keep her for life. Nevertheless, it was impossible for the “property” to have her stays with him as he had done in the east. In Vienna, when he went to business, he placed her in institutions where daughters of the nobility went to education.
The first separation had occurred when he left to Bratislava, Austria for business. During the period, they exchanged letters in Italian. He would say, "I love you very much, as you well know I desire the time passes pleasantly for you". Sometimes he wrote her to wear "the read jacket and black trouser". In Vienna, she met a young slave Otchu Aga who was seized in Ethiopia as well. She thought him an Oromo song. German scholar Karl Tutschek, the author of the first Oromo dictionary for posterity, recorded some of the songs.
<p>Illness 
<p>Mahabuba's health condition deteriorated. Consumption of lung and tapeworm led her to appear like a skeleton. It seems leaving her alone became imposible. Even the great doctor Matifed declared," she would die if parted from the prince." The prince sent her to Marinbad, in Bohemia, when he went to the west for personal business. They exchanged immense passion packed letters. He always demanded her to write him only on her own handwriting. 
Puckler found it necessary to stay in Berlin because his wife Lucie had been seriously ill. He entrusted the family doctor Dr Freud to care for the slave girl. She was, however, gravely ill. The doctor suggests she had less than a month to live. Mahabuba wrote to Puckler saying, "I am very ill. I will never be cured, I wish only that you, my prince, be present at my death...to live or die is the same to me". When the prince's letter was delayed, she felt distressed. Dr. Freud recalled, "The young lady is very sad because of the lack of news...everyday she mourns".
<p>While she was alone in foreign land, she died on October 27, 1840. Her last word was recorded as" write a good, good farwell to my dear prince".  Herman was shattered when heard the unexpected news.  He wrote for friends "oh! My friends the loss touched me more dearly than all of you can conceive. She is  irreplaceable on this earth. It would have been a great consolation for me not to have had to abandon the poor girl in death that I never abandon in life". Two days latter, she was buried. Puckler did not attend the funeral. He wrote to his friends "Mahabuba was the being I loved most of all in the world."

